# Data Engineering
## Project: Cloud Data Lake

## Project Overview
A music streaming startup, Sparkify, has grown their user base and song database and want to move their processes and data onto the cloud. Their data resides in S3, in a directory of JSON logs on user activity on the app, as well as a directory with JSON metadata on the songs in their app.

As their data engineer, you are tasked with building an ETL pipeline that extracts their data from S3, stages them in Redshift, and transforms data into a set of dimensional tables for their analytics team to continue finding insights in what songs their users are listening to. You'll be able to test your database and ETL pipeline by running queries given to you by the analytics team from Sparkify and compare your results with their expected results.

### Install

This project requires **Python 3.x** and the following Python libraries installed:

- [PySpark](https://spark.apache.org/docs/latest/api/python/index.html)

### Code

This project contains four files:

- `dwh.cfg`: Configuration file.
- `sql_queries.py`: Define SQL statements, which will be imported into the two files below.
- `create_tables.py`: Create fact and dimension tables for the star schema in Redshift.
- `etl.py`: Load data from S3 into staging tables on Redshift and then process that data into analytics tables on Redshift.

### Run
1. Launch a redshift cluster and create an IAM role that has read access to S3.
2. Add redshift database and IAM role info to dwh.cfg
3. Create tables in Redshift by running following command:
```bash
python3 create_tables.py
```  
4. Load data from S3 to staging tables on Redshift and then load data from staging to analytics tables.
```bash
python3 etl.py
```  

### Data
Dataset for this project is publicly available on AWS S3: 
- Song Data: s3://udacity-dend/song_data
- Log Data: s3://udacity-dend/log_data

1. **Song Dataset**: Dataset is a subset of real data from the [Million Song Dataset](https://labrosa.ee.columbia.edu/millionsong/). Each file is in JSON format and contains metadata about a song and the artist of that song. The files are partitioned by the first three letters of each song's track ID.
   - `File Count: 385253` / `Total Size: 803 MB`

2. **Log Dataset**: Dataset consists of log files in JSON format generated by this [event simulator](https://github.com/Interana/eventsim) based on the songs in the dataset above. These simulate app activity logs from an imaginary music streaming app based on configuration settings. Log files in the dataset are partitioned by year and month. 
   - `File Count: 31` / `Total Size: 4 MB`

### Schema for Song Play Analysis
Using the song and log datasets, you'll need to create a star schema optimized for queries on song play analysis. This includes the following tables.

#### Fact Table
1. **songplays** - records in log data associated with song plays i.e. records with page NextSong
   - songplay_id, start_time, user_id, level, song_id, artist_id, session_id, location, user_agent

#### Dimension Tables
2. **users** - users in the app
   - user_id, first_name, last_name, gender, level
3. **songs** - songs in music database
   - song_id, title, artist_id, year, duration
4. **artists** - artists in music database
   - artist_id, name, location, lattitude, longitude
5. **time** - timestamps of records in songplays broken down into specific units
   - start_time, hour, day, week, month, year, weekday